Blog Post: Load testing (#683)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2020-09-07-improving-performance-through-load-testing.md

---
title: "Improving performance (and more) through load testing"
slug: improving-performance-through-load-testing
date: 2020-09-07
categories:
    - "performance"
    - "testing"
author: Claudio Costa
github: streamer45
community: claudio.costa
canonicalUrl: https://mattermost.com/blog/improving-performance-through-load-testing/
---

> Have you ever wondered how many active users your application can handle at the same time? If so, you are not alone. Here at Mattermost we are building a highly concurrent messaging platform for team collaboration that needs to potentially serve up to several thousands of users simultaneously. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have you ever wondered how many active users your application can handle at the same time? If so, you're not alone. Here at Mattermost we're building a highly concurrent messaging platform for team collaboration that needs to potentially serve up to several thousands of users simultaneously. 
```

> While standard functional testing (e.g. unit tests) is critical to verify correct behaviour of your application, it's usually not sufficient to guarantee its performance at scale. This is where some form of performance testing can be particularly useful. Benchmarks do a good job at measuring the performance impact of single functions or limited portions of a codebase, but they cannot capture how an application is going to perform as a whole under real-world conditions. To achieve this you need **load testing**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While standard functional testing (e.g. unit tests) is critical to verify correct behaviour of your application, it's usually not sufficient to guarantee its performance at scale. This is where some form of performance testing can be particularly useful. Benchmarks do a good job at measuring the performance impact of single functions or limited portions of a codebase, but they can't capture how an application is going to perform as a whole under real-world conditions. To achieve this you need **load testing**.
```

## What is load testing?

Load testing is the process of applying a certain amount of load to a target system in order to understand how it behaves.
The more realistic the generated load is, the more accurate and insightful the final results will be.

> ## Why does it matter?

Author: Maybe this could be a good point to expand on in a possible follow up article which will be more technical and completely focused on our solution. Here my plan is more to do a gentle introduction on the value of load-testing as a general technique and mention how we solved the problem but without going into much depth.

> ## Why does it matter?

Reviewer 2: I see, makes sense :)

Load testing can be used to improve both the performance and the overall quality of your application by helping you to:

- Identify performance bottlenecks in your system.
- Determine the overall capacity of your application.
- Prevent performance regressions between releases.
- Discover insidious bugs that passed functional testing.

As an example, these are some of non-performance related, but rather significant issues we've been able to detect while load testing:

- Data races
- Application crashes
- Deadlocks
- Memory leaks

As you can see, running load tests can guard your software against problems of different nature. By simulating users you get a chance to realistically test a system before it hits production and potentially avoid several issues down the line.

## How are we doing it?

> There are plenty of extremely valid load testing frameworks available; some of the best are free and open source (JMeter, Gatling, k6 to name a few). In our case, after a thorough examination, we decided to develop a custom, in-house tool. We accepted trading implementation time and complexity for improved simulation and finer control over the entire process. We've recently released [version 1.0](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-load-test-ng/releases/tag/v1.0.0) and we're quite happy with the choice we made. While the tool itself is not designed for general purpose use, it can still serve as a good example of how we tackled the problem of designing and developing a custom load testing engine.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention which parts of the system is being under test with the tool? Is it only server? Or it is a stack of application etc.

Author: I'll add a couple of lines make it clear at which level we generate the load and what it affects.

> There are plenty of extremely valid load testing frameworks available; some of the best are free and open source (JMeter, Gatling, k6 to name a few). In our case, after a thorough examination, we decided to develop a custom, in-house tool. We accepted trading implementation time and complexity for improved simulation and finer control over the entire process. We've recently released [version 1.0](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-load-test-ng/releases/tag/v1.0.0) and we're quite happy with the choice we made. While the tool itself is not designed for general purpose use, it can still serve as a good example of how we tackled the problem of designing and developing a custom load testing engine.

Reviewer 3: Not sure about the "extremely valid" part. Did you mean, "extremely well-written" or something similar?

Also, might be useful to link the tools to their homepages.

Author: I mean that those are perfectly valid options, used by many successful companies that didn't make our same choice of building a custom tool.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I think "perfectly valid" is better than "extremely valid" :)

> There are plenty of extremely valid load testing frameworks available; some of the best are free and open source (JMeter, Gatling, k6 to name a few). In our case, after a thorough examination, we decided to develop a custom, in-house tool. We accepted trading implementation time and complexity for improved simulation and finer control over the entire process. We've recently released [version 1.0](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-load-test-ng/releases/tag/v1.0.0) and we are quite happy with the choice we made. While the tool itself is not designed for general purpose use, it can still serve as a good example of how we tackled the problem of designing and developing a custom load testing engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are plenty of extremely valid load testing frameworks available; some of the best are free and open source (JMeter, Gatling, k6 to name a few). In our case, after a thorough examination, we decided to develop a custom, in-house tool. We accepted trading implementation time and complexity for improved simulation and finer control over the entire process. We've recently released [version 1.0](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-load-test-ng/releases/tag/v1.0.0) and we're quite happy with the choice we made. While the tool itself is not designed for general purpose use, it can still serve as a good example of how we tackled the problem of designing and developing a custom load testing engine.
```

### Simulating the load

> As the definition says, the core of the process is load generation. However, in order for results to be meaningful, we need the software to mimic actual user behavior. We achieve this by leveraging data coming from real users through the use of:

Reviewer 2: Are there any other canonical load generation methods? If so, we can mention them and explain why we picked hitting directly to the endpoints by using a user client.

Author: I think what we are doing is not far off from the *canonical* way of load testing. There are other strategies of course like relaying on some pre-recorded users scenarios instead of actually building the simulation from scratch.

I think the most significant difference that our tool introduces is the use of a feedback loop to converge and I've attempted to explain from an high level point of view why and how we did so.

> As the definition says, the core of the process is load generation. However, in order for results to be meaningful, we need the software to mimic actual user behaviour. We achieve this by leveraging data coming from real users through the use of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the definition says, the core of the process is load generation. However, in order for results to be meaningful, we need the software to mimic actual user behavior. We achieve this by leveraging data coming from real users through the use of:
```

- Server-side metrics (e.g. frequency of a given API call)
- User telemetry data (e.g. frequency of a user event/action)

> Fortunately, here at Mattermost we have a convenient advantage: we use our own application in our day to day work. This means we are able to continuously collect a considerable amount of realistic metrics from our community servers. We can then use such data to model user behaviour. To do this we create a table of user's actions with their respective frequencies. This action-frequency map will feed the simulation process: a simulated user will randomly pick and perform an action based on its frequency so that most common actions will be picked more often.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, here at Mattermost we have a convenient advantage: we use our own application in our day-to-day work. This means we're able to continuously collect a considerable amount of realistic metrics from our community servers. We can then use such data to model user behavior. To do this we create a table of a user's actions with their respective frequencies. This action-frequency map will feed the simulation process: a simulated user will randomly pick and perform an action based on its frequency so that the most common actions will be picked more often.
```

![feedback-loop](/blog/2020-09-07-improving-performance-through-load-testing/feedback-loop.png)

The idea is quite simple: have the load testing engine react to what's happening on the target system by dynamically changing the amount of load applied in response to some event. This is achieved through the monitoring of those metrics that can best signal service degradation. Some that we make use of are:

- Request durations (average and percentiles)
- Request errors rate
- Client timeouts rate

![graph](/blog/2020-09-07-improving-performance-through-load-testing/graph.png)

The load testing software constantly increases the number of active users up until it detects signs of performance degradation. This happens when the metrics being monitored reach their configured thresholds (e.g. 100ms for average request duration).

> In response to such an event, the load testing engine starts to lower the number of users. This process continues for a while until an **equilibrium point** is reached. This value, over which performance starts to degrade, gives us a fairly good estimate on the users capacity of our target application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In response to such an event, the load testing engine starts to lower the number of users. This process continues for a while until an **equilibrium point** is reached. This value, over which performance starts to degrade, gives us a fairly good estimate on the user capacity our target application can comfortably support.
```

> ## Wrapping Up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Wrapping up
```

> The success of a software system greatly depends on its performance. In today's cloud-oriented world this is increasily more true. A small outage can have a serious impact on your customers and eventually affect your company's revenue, especially when a [service level agreement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_level_agreement) is in place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The success of a software system greatly depends on its performance, especially in today's cloud-oriented world. A small outage can have a serious impact on your customers and eventually affect your company's revenue, especially when a [service level agreement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_level_agreement) is in place.
```

Author: @justinegeffen 

Any suggestion to avoid the consecutive use of "especially" in the paragraph?

Reviewer 2: The second especially can be "above all" 🤷

Load testing is a precious tool that can help your team to improve both the overall quality and stability of your system by preventing performance issues and application bugs while improving scalability and minimizing the risk of down times.

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we have any future plans or ideas? If so we can add here to initiate a discussion.

Author: I'll add a teaser at the end that hopefully will keep more technical folks interested.

Reviewer 2: 🕺

> If you'd like to know more about this particular topic or discuss performance in general, reach us in the [Developers: Performance](https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/developers-performance) channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you'd like to know more about this particular topic or discuss performance in general, you can reach us in the [Developers: Performance](https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/developers-performance) channel.
```
